bumblebees have a particular problem in
any given area there's only a limited
number of holes that are suitable for
nests European honeybees which in the
wild nest in holes in trees have similar
difficulty but some bees have adopted a
very radical solution a very brave
solution to that difficulty they nest
out in the open but at the top of tall
trees sometimes very tall trees
these are the giant Asiatic bees the
biggest of all honeybees they're found
from the Himalayas all the way down to
Southeast Asia
these colonies are in Malaysia they
defend themselves with stings very very
powerful stings which is why I have to
wear a bee suit and it's not just
against one bee that you have your card
yourself because if one bee attacks you
it releases a pheromone a chemical
signal which is detected by the others
in the code and within seconds there
will be hundreds indeed probably
thousands of them all around you
launching a mass attack and stinging you
and some of those things can actually go
through a bee suit so something to be
avoided
stinging is a very expensive form of
defense because when a bee loses its
sting it dies so it's better for the
colony to warn predators off before they
have to fight them off and they warn
them with some dramatic displayers
I've got a a reproduction of a hornet
which is one of the main enemies of bees
I'll see if I can get them to do it
just watch there see there's a moving
wave which passes over the surface of
the colony and that not only produces an
impressive pattern but it also makes it
very difficult for any aggressor like
perhaps a hornet which eats beings to
actually land on that moving carpet of
wings
the colonies great treasure of course is
its huge store of honey this is produced
from nectar which the bees industriously
collect from flowers they systematically
expose it to the air so that the water
it contains evaporates and the nectar
becomes sweeter and thicker eventually
it turns into honey
the combs in which they store it are
continuously guarded by the covering of
bees they cling so thickly that it might
seem that nothing could get past them
but some thieves know how to do so
particularly at night
a death's-head hawkmoth flies over the
surface of the colony and goes so close
to it that the bees are alarmed enough
to wave their warning
but the math is not put off it wants
honey
amazingly it manages to land on the
carpet of bees and quickly pushes its
way through them a quick sip of honey
and it's off it succeeds because
although it looks nothing like a bee to
our eyes it has camouflage itself with a
smell a pheromone that convinces the
bees that it's one of them but in spite
of such raids bees
thanks to their stings retain their
precious honey precious because it is
that that enables them to survive a
season without flowers